this is chemical processes for micro and
nanofabrication on Chris Mac and this is
lecture 9 CMOS process flow a reading
for this lecture is chapter 16 of our
textbook by Campbell fabrication
engineering at the micro and nano scale
our topic today we're going to go
through a very basic very simplified
version of the typical CMOS process flow
here our emphasis will be on looking at
how the different process steps tie
together to make a CMOS circuit we won't
cover everything today there's lots and
lots of steps that we won't even mention
but we'll cover the basics the the most
important steps and see the order that
they're done in and what kind of
structures result because of that and
then when we go through the individual
process steps in detail when we talk
about oxidation and deposition and etch
etc we'll have a bit of more context for
how they fit so let's go through some of
these basic typical process steps first
I'll call it step 0 wafer preparation
we're gonna laser scribe the back of the
wafer to put a unique ID number
sometimes a barcode on those wafers
we're going to clean the wafers we're
going to do gettering that's where we
implant big imperfections into the back
of the wafer that will then attract
other defects to them and away from the
surface where we're going to have our
devices and we'll do zeroth layer
alignment marks that the rest of the
circuitry will be aligned to as we build
up our patterns step 1
and sometimes the order of these steps
aren't exactly the same depending on the
type of process you're doing the step 1
is will create n Wells and P wells
sometimes we use the wafer and it's
doping instead of one of these wells but
today it's much more common to have both
an N well and a P well these form the
regions of the wafer where we're going
to create our devices and we'll get the
doping that we want for those devices in
these wells then we'll create the active
area this is defines the regions of the
wafer that are going to be isolated with
a thick
oxidation and those regions that are
active that is where our transistor is
going to be so every transistor is
surrounded by an oxide insulator to
isolate it then and will form our poly
silicon gate the gate of our gate source
drain MOS transistor and we'll do some
engineering of the the structures of
that gate something called a lightly
doped drain where we put sidewall
spacers on the gate and do a little bit
of doping then we'll do our main source
drain implant and diffusion to create
the source in the drain now we've
actually built a transistor from here on
out we're gonna connect up the
transistors to make a circuit so we're
gonna form Southside and contact holes
which is where we're gonna make our
contacts to the source in the drain and
a gate so that we can make electrical
contact and wire up our transistors
we'll use tungsten plugs to fill up
these contact holes and then a level of
metallization to run wires to connect
the transistors together but one level
of metallization is generally not enough
we need to have additional metal layers
often two four six high as ten layers of
metal to run all the different wires
that are required to connect to all of
these transistors millions even billions
of transistors together and finally
we'll put a passivation layer over the
top and open up that passivation
passivation layer for bonding pads when
we package the chip and communicate with
the outside world that's the basic flow
let's look at some pictures of some of
the main steps described here not all of
them and see how it works so to begin
we're gonna make our wet Wells I'm only
going to show you the n well here and
this very simplified process will assume
that the P substrate the P doped
substrate will be used for
the n-channel device without having to
have a p well but generally we would
have a p well
so we'll form an oxide layer on top of
the wafer we'll open up that oxide layer
by doing a patterning step lithography
plus hatch and then the open area this
area right here that is not protected by
oxide will implant a dopant and then
diffuse it in this will be phosphorus in
this case which is an n-type dopant and
will create this n-well of doped region
the oxide serves as a barrier so the
implant dopant lands inside the oxide it
doesn't get into the substrate and also
it's a diffusion barrier this dopant
doesn't diffuse very well in oxide so no
the dopant makes it into the substrate
underneath the oxide only in the open
area do we get our n-type dopant and now
we've got an
n-well in which we're going to form our
p-channel device then we're going to
create our active areas what we mean by
creating an active area is we're going
to grow oxide in the regions where we
don't want a transistor in this oxide
will act as an isolation between the
various active areas so I'm not going
through all the steps required here but
we'll form a pattern and photoresist
which will then transfer usually into a
nitride layer which then blocks the
formation of an oxide layer here here
and here everyone that's everywhere
that's not being protected forms an
isolation area this is a process called
local oxidation of silicon there's
also another more important process
today called shallow trench isolation
they form the same they have the same
function they create isolation regions
between the active areas and these
active areas become the areas where
we're gonna build our transistor the
poly gate formation we first grow a thin
oxide or deposit a thin oxide over our
active areas here and here and we
pattern deposit poly silicon and pattern
into the poly silicon gate so this gate
region will be the gate of our CMOS our
MOS transistor notice that we have one
on each side over the end well we're
going to form a p-channel device and
over the substrate in this case or it
could be a P well we're gonna form an
n-channel device so now we're going to
do our doping for our source and drain
we have to do it in two steps because
we're forming both a p-channel device
and an n-channel device for the
n-channel device we need to chip deposit
donors n type dopants into the source
in the drain region so we're going to
use arsenic for our dopant we cover up
with photoresist all those regions where
we don't want the arsenic dopant to
go so the dopant lands inside the
photoresist and is blocked it's not able
to get into the substrate but here in
this this region of the source and the
drain we we form our dopants and diffuse
them into the substrate notice that the
gate also acts as a block to prevent
dopants from getting underneath the gate
so we call this a self-aligned gate
process because the source and drain are
self aligned to the gate by nature of
the fact that the gate blocks the dopant
since this is an n-type dopant we form
our source and drain and implanted
regions we then cover up the n-channel
device and we open up a region where our
p-channel device is going to be made and
we apply a P dopant boron in this case
to create the source and drain inside of
the N well now we've got the source and
drain and the gate all made up for both
types of devices the P well and the
n-well device the P channel in the n
well and the n channel in this case
the P substrate we're going to make
contact holes generally we would form a
a Southside
a compound of that improves the contact
resistance then will deposit oxide over
everything as shown here after we've
created the Southside layer which is not
shown in this figure from the oxide do
lithography step to put holes in this
oxide so now we have contact holes to
make contact with the source in the
drain of both devices also not shown
because it be in the back into the
screen or out of the screen and the
three-dimensional view will be contact
holes making contact to the gates as
well we're gonna fill these contact
holes up with the metallization here I
show kind of an older process where
we're going to fill it up with an
aluminum interconnect a more modern
process today would fill up these
contact holes with a tungsten plug and
then use copper to interconnect or wire
up the transistors well this is a
cross-sectional view let's see what that
looks like top down as well so here I
repeat that cross sectional view with
the two transistors the end channel and
the P channel next to each other with
contacts wired up and then here's a
top-down view so our cross section is
cutting right through this middle region
here right through here
so we have an end well formed in this
dotted line and then we have our
diffusion regions the active area is
formed here and here in pink and yellow
for the two different devices our gate
is shown in the green going across so
whenever I have a diffusion region or an
active area where I'm gonna implant my
source and drain with a gate crossing it
that's a transistor a gate crossing an
active area forms a transistor because
well the source and drain on either side
and the gate and now else we have to do
is make contact to each of those so I
have a metal line making a contact to
the source and metal I'm making contact
to the drain and another metal line
making contact to the gate now how these
things get connected up depends on the
specifics of the circuit here I show
these two gates connected together maybe
I'm making an inverter using these
complementary MOS transistors well this
is up to the first level of metal but we
need more levels of metal to connect all
of the transistors together the
highest-end logic devices today might
have 10 layers of metal here's a picture
from that I got from IBM 2005
it shows copper wiring so these are
copper wires and it's kind of cut in two
cross sections so you can see two sides
of it
the transistors are way down here at the
surface of the silicon and then these
are the copper interconnects in the
first layer the second layer the third
layer the fourth layer the fifth layer
the sixth layer etc and then we have
these interconnections that connect one
layer to the next all the way up so
here's a layer of metal here's a layer
of metal and then in between we have
some some vias that are filled with
copper to make a connection from the
last layer to this layer and finally
over the top we have a passivation layer
that covers the whole chip except for
the regions where we need to do bonding
to in our package well that is a very
very brief description of the major
steps we're going to spend a lot of time
this semester going through each of the
individual process steps in some detail
but at least now you have a picture of
how they all fit together to form a
seamless device and a circuit so what
have we learned in lecture 9 you should
be able to list the basic steps in the
CMOS process flow now the numbering is
not unique just arbitrary the numbers
that I pick you don't worry about what
is number six or number four but the
basic steps in the order that they go in
you should be able to know and finally
you should be able to find the
transistor if you're looking at a
top-down design view look for the gates
and the active areas you should be able
to point to where the transistors are in
that design
well that's lecture 9 beginning next
time we're going to begin our unit
process steps will begin with oxidation
and go through the different unit
processing steps and look at them in
some detail thanks and see you then